then at Scripps, and then went back to Rhode
Island. But he's been very active in the kind of
political aspects of these things and so on, and
you certainly ought
to have a talk with him now. research vessels.
Obviously you don't have any when you come here.
What do you do? How do you go about it? What kind do
you try to choose? What do you want your
undergraduates to have? Just tell me about it.
Well, here we were influenced a good deal by also
local tradition and so on. And when I arrived here
in 51, the department under primarily under Dr.
Barnes's I think impetus had obtained through
sort of government surplus a small vessel that had
been originally built by the Bureau of Commercial
Fisheries. She was about 115 feet long, wood hull,
and had been designed not as a fishing vessel, but
essentially as a small kind of passenger and
freight vessel to take care of supplying
fisheries
programs up in Alaska and so on. She had an
interesting sort of characteristic that she
could accommodate, although she was a small
vessel, she could accommodate quite a large
number of passengers and had a large hold which in
effect we were able to convert to a sort of
laboratory. She was not, didn't have a great deal
of deck space and so on. But this vessel had been
procured, and it required a certain amount of
conversion, as they always do, and also the
installation of necessary winches and so on. We
used this what was, in a sense, a very small type
vessel up until we obtained the the Thompson,
which is one of these Agars, in about 1965 or 66. So
we used Brown Bear for about 15 years, and not only
for local work inside Puget Sound and so on and off
the coast, but we took her out into the North
Pacific. not but she was range limited as well as so
size limited and so it was sort of gulf of alaska and
so on but out along the illusion chain and in 1964
and i'm sorry 19
must be 19 1959, 1960, we actually took her north up
into the Bering Sea and actually into the Arctic.
So we extended, we stretched her capabilities
just about as much
and maybe beyond sort of reasonable limits. But
she proved to be a very kind of efficient vessel in
that she could be operated with a fairly small crew
and so on. And we thought we got a lot of good work out
of her. When she was replaced by the T.G. Thompson,
we were We were clearly thought of vessel limited,
but we ended up with a real sort of problem here in
the fact that we were really rather reluctant to
take on one of these AGARs, but had been told
repeatedly by ONR and NSF that the vessel would be
completely funded. because it was almost an order
of magnitude jump here in the cost of operations
and so on. So we finally did, and of course we no
sooner had delivery of the ship than they said they
couldn't budget it. And the department has really
been fighting ever since to, in a sense, get
adequate vessels, operation support for the
vessels. And one thing we did not get involved in,
and it was done intentionally, and
maybe hard to tell whether we were right or wrong,
but we never got involved in anything like the
Indian Ocean Expedition, or even going back prior
to that to the IGY of using this as a mechanism, in a
sense, to expand the fleet and so on, which was
clearly done, I think, at some of the
institutions. They used these major national
efforts to increase the size of their fleet. But
we've never felt we had quite the same, or I never
felt, maybe I should say, and I know some of the
faculty would agree with me, that we should try and
do the same kind of things as Scripps and Woods Hole
did. But we had our own destiny to try and work out
here, which didn't necessarily involve the very
extensive sea-going cruises. Did you expect all
your undergraduates to work on the vessel out at
sea? Oh,
I think I would have said yes if you go back to the
early 50s or something, but
we got very much caught up with this. The Sputnik
era here, with increased interest in science and
so on. And certainly the ocean became a very
romantic sort of an area of study. And so our
undergraduate program shot up at a rate that I
don't think we would ever have sort of predicted.
And we were, our undergraduate enrollment in
oceanography was increasing about 25% a year,
which means it doubled every three years. And we
went from one student or something in 1952, and we
were up to I think over 800 in
Well, the early 60s, I guess it was. And, I mean, it
was clearly obvious you couldn't do the kind of
things that we'd originally had in mind, which, as
I think I mentioned earlier, a really sort of
practical preparation of sea work and so forth.
And it got to a point that We couldn't even give
laboratories
with our formal courses because we didn't have the
capacity to handle this number of students, so
even the kind of laboratory work clearly suffered
under this expansion. It was very exciting, but I
think, probably went too far. Now, I don't know
what the later, what's happening in the last year
or two, but it's dropped down considerably, the
undergraduate enrollment. But it, in a sense, got
overinflated here, but not really due to our
recruiting efforts or anything, but just because
of the general
And we've done a lot of things other than just the
sort of formal
undergraduate and graduate training here, in
that
it started back in the days where I really felt we
did need to provide some input of students and so
on. which involved working with high school
teachers and so on. I ran summer institutes for
high school teachers for a number of years here,
with the idea that they'd encourage some of their
students to come into the field. I've been
involved in the writing of two high school level
textbooks.
So we did that, and one of the things which had
started before the war was a general sort of
introductory oceanography course which still
carries them. number of Oceanography 101, which
was in no way intended for our own majors, but a
science orientation course. And most of the
students who take it are not even science
students, but humanities and social science
students. We were teaching. That's a five-credit
course. And a few years ago, at least, we were
teaching that to over 1,500 students a year.
We build up, certainly. I must have some sort of
general public awareness of the field, at least.
And I think these are worthwhile things. They're
not just sort of promotional. But anybody living
around here, I think, ought to know a little bit
about what the ocean is like.
So that's still going on. When you started to
outfit these early vessels, did you have a
professional captain do something? Something
like James Spahn, I'm thinking of, or did you try to
do it within your department? No, we started out in
a sort of small way here, and the first man we had who
was skipper of, he'd been a skipper of an even
smaller vessel before the Brown Bear, had no sort
of formal training as an officer. He had been a
fisherman primarily, and a small boat operator
type person, and came in and kind of learned the job
as he went along. He was a marvelous individual,
and Frank Princehouse, and
very much interested in the in what we were trying
to do, and extremely cooperative and very good at
taking care of the vessel and the crew and so on. We
actually had to see that he got the opportunity to
get some sort of special training and so on when the
Thompson came along, because otherwise he
couldn't have been captain on the Thompson.
Unfortunately, shortly after we got the
Thompson, he developed a serious Elmont and since
died, but he was captain on her for about a year or
so. And then we went to these more sort of
professionally trained officers. And I think the
man that's captain now is the Thompson that came to
us from Scripps, having been on one of their ships.
So there's been a switch there, but it's partly
related again just to the size of the vessels and
the kind of Coast Guard regulations about the
types of officers that you have to have on board.
When you first come to Washington, the funding for
oceanography and oceanographic departments was
sort of a block funding. That is, that... When I
came out here. When you came out here, right. Yes.
Is that ONR and so forth would give sort of a block
funding to a university, which has moved recently
to sort of special project fundings. What sort of
feeling do you have about that as it affects the way
you try to work your department? Well, of course,
I've been out of this, you know, for about ten
years. But I just think it's been a very
unfortunate sort of trend. And I keep hoping I can
see some sign that's going to reverse itself. But I
don't think I have been able to see anything so far
that, yes, although the In a sense, in terms of the
total dollars, they were small now compared to
what's being transferred
these days. Nevertheless, they were relatively
large amounts, and in the first few years when
essentially all our support came from ONR, it
almost used to be done by letter. they'd send us a
letter saying, what do you want to do? And we'd
write a letter back saying, we think it'd be fun to
do so. And they'd say, well, we think we can give you
X thousand dollars next year. And why don't you
write a request for that? And we'd write another
letter saying, we'd like to have so much for next
year. And that was it. But since then, it has gone
progressively towards more agencies involved,
which in a way, is life insurance, I think, from our
point of view, because not all of them go up and down
at the same time, so it gives you some sort of
security in that way. But the fact that the
projects have been split down and down and down and
down, and two, the situation which I feel prevails
today where money is not allocated really to,
although legally it comes to the university and to
the department, it's based on these individual
sort of proposals. And what people do is start
talking about my money and my ship time and so
forth.
I think that from an administrative point of view
it's essentially an intolerable situation and
that the chairman of the department has no way of
administering. All he's doing is trying to fit
together all these little bits and pieces and he
has no way of fitting things together in most
cases. and saying, okay, you two fellows get
together, use the ship jointly or something. They
both say, well, I got my money to do so and so on. And
it's completely sort of ridiculous. I think it's a
part of sort of Parkinson's law here that this is
the way in which a bureaucracy functions. It tends
to generate work for itself, and this is exactly
what I can see is happening in Washington, that If
you can have 100 projects under your guidance,
rather than 10, you've got that much more paper,
and you justify many more positions, and so on. But
this, plus the fact that there are many, many more
sort of bookkeeping requirements these days than
there used to be,
really makes it major sort of problem, I think,
from the administrative point of view, to do these
things. The problem, I think, has sort of been
compounded recently by the fact that they've got
into this multi-institutional pattern here and I
haven't had any direct part of any of these things
because I don't know how they manage to do those
things and keep them going. But even the Sea Grant
program was originally thought of as a sort of
block funding type thing and even there they
without any kind of appropriate authorization
from Congress or anything, they went off in the
same direction of breaking things down into
ridiculously small things. And there's all the
paperwork involved with this, as well as the lack
of flexibility. The other thing that's been
happening here is the fact that you're committed
to making plans longer and longer in advance that
you want any kind of major support these days.
You've probably got a plan about three years ahead
and hard to get it. The result is, by the time this
third year's rolled around, you have absolutely
no flexibility. If things have changed or
something, you're kind of stuck with things. So
that planning is fine, but certainly you lose any
kind of choice in things.
A lot of the problems that have come from the
combination of inflation and reduced funding and
so on have really been most critical since I
stepped aside as chairman of the department. And I
thought I was leaving everything and looked rosy
at the time that I decided that I would step down as
chairman. And I couldn't, in a sense, I probably
couldn't have chosen a better time. But I
certainly had no anticipation of what was going to
happen. What about the division of agencies,
which you mentioned earlier? Let me sketch
something for you. ONR becomes more
mission-oriented as it advances upward after
World War II, let's say particularly after 1949.
And you begin to have the rise of NSF and other
scientific agencies to administer
oceanography. Was this essentially a good thing?
Well, the...
I think it was for probably many different sort of
reasons. But ONR was obviously strictly a Navy
type thing, although in the early days they
certainly interpreted their responsibilities
very broadly, I think, relatively speaking. But
there were areas that they were sort of not
touching at all. But essentially, at least my
interpretation is that sort of out of the ONR model
came this idea for NSF. And NSF was set up, as I
recall, in 1951. Let's see, the first director was
moved over from ONR, remember, wasn't it?
Waterman.
But the general situation was that ONR would
continue to support oceanography. NSF would get
into, essentially, other fields. And NSF really
didn't get into oceanography to any, I think I'm
right in saying, any kind of significant extent
until the IGYCAPE program came along, which was
actually in what was it, 57, 58, but where the
funding must have predated that by a year or so. And
I think NSF picked that up because, well, it was not
just oceanography, there were many other
aspects, but it would not have been appropriate
for ONR to have gone into all of these other fields
besides oceanography, certainly some of them. So
this is really what moved NSF into the picture, and
they've essentially never been out of it since.
And the
sort of drift of things has been such that we've
been told various times, well, NSF's going to pick
up more and more of this.
I don't know quite what has happened. ONR seemed to
be sort of going down in level of support as far as
they were concerned here, but now I hear that maybe
they're coming up again and so on. What has been
difficult is for us, and we're not alone in this, is
to how do you sort of deal with ONR, NSF, AEC, which
no longer exists under that name, but how do you
keep some sort of a balance or whatever with these
different agencies? And very often I feel that we
have been in the position of kind of divide and
conquer. where all the money and so forth existed
in Washington. They were the ones who got together
and decided, well, we'll support this
institution to such and such a level. We're put in a
position of asking people for in a sense,
overlapping kind of support. I don't think this is
actually done. But I mean, you never know quite
what's going to come out of these things. So I think
it's been kind of a scary game here. And AEC
turned out to be a fairly substantial supporter
for our work here, and entirely on sort of
environmental studies, although they were
related to to essentially radioactive materials
that might get into the Columbia River and so on. So
that was a concern to them, but they were a kind of
major supporter here. It seems almost to an
outsider that it's as if oceanographers looked at
what the government wanted and planned a research
topic they might get funded rather than moving out
and directing research to what interested them.
Is that a? I think so, and of course there's always
the kind of argument here about freedom of
research and so forth, and I think all of the
agencies have
made quite a conscious effort to play fair on this
thing, but the fact is that they do influence you a
good deal, not by telling you what to do, but by
refusing to support things that they didn't want
to do. So things do become very much controlled in
this way, and exceedingly difficult to get sort of
new things started, and particularly to get sort
of younger men started and so on here.
So I think it reached a point where there was a sort
of undesirable
amount of control over what goes on. Sure, you do
things where the money is. Now, we've chosen in a
few cases not to go where the money was. We didn't
participate at all in this Indian Ocean
expedition by choice. We did not, we were asked at
one time if we wanted to get involved in a lot of the
Antarctic operations, and we said no thank you, we
didn't want to.
We've, I guess, here have operated a little bit
more on a sort of an individual basis than some, and
have not participated maybe as much in some of
these multi-institutional programs that have
been coming along here in recent years. Some of the
individuals have. They've participated and gone
on and so on. Now, we did get quite involved here for
several years in this as part of the
international,
what's it called, international biological
program on this upwelling.
But we've more or less operated
more by ourselves, in a way. Is this because of the
undergraduate emphasis here? No, I don't think
one could say that, although the
good many of the faculty are involved in teaching,
either at undergraduate or graduate level, which
means that they're not entirely free to go off for
long periods without making appropriate sort of
adjustments and reallocations.
No, I think it's more sort of individual choices. I
may be overemphasizing this in a way,
One
thing that I sort of fought against for a number of
years was getting involved in
this
general sort of marine geophysics, this
refraction and reflection, seismic shooting and
so on, which involved carrying explosives and
was, in a sense, kind of a hazardous thing. And I
said, I didn't think we ought to get into that.
There were two or three institutions that were
heavily involved in it. Why did we have to get into
it? Well, lo and behold, some money came along, and
we were doing it. And we no sooner got started on it
than ONR cut off the support. So we were probably
being well advised never to get really sort of
committed to that thing. And I think there have
been some, probably some similar sort of things.
So
it's,
I think if one took a really sort of objective view
of things, one would find that The programs in this
country are pretty much sort of what the federal
government agencies want them to be. There's very
little sort of independence here now. They can
always turn around and say that anybody who wants
to can submit a proposal on anything they think
they want to do. If something isn't going on, it's
because nobody's interested in doing the work. So
they're kind of stuck on this. I, just for fun here
several years ago, I dreamed up a rhetorical
question. I asked Professor Rattray whether I
could have the Thompson for a couple of weeks. And
he said, what do you want the Thompson for? And I
said, I'm not going to tell you, but I've got an idea
that I want to test. Can I have the ship for a couple
of weeks? And he thought for a while, and he said,
well, he guessed I could. It would require some
telephoning to Washington to get some funds
reallocated and so on. But if I really had a good
thing, I could probably get the ship. And I said,
what about some people to help me? And he said, oh,
no, no people. Everybody's committed, you see, to
other programs. So I had, this was just,
hypothetical question, but it indicates how tied
up you are with the system in a way. We had a, we've
mentioned it at lunchtime here, we had this
drought situation this year, and it was more than
just a local drought, something very unusual has
been happening out in the